by a contract from the Office of Naval Research. So
that has slipped into the CV, but it's not really, I
was not an employee of ONR. I was supported by them,
but not an employee. Well, what is the ONR's
connection with the Duke Marine Lab?
Well, it'll be the same as it has with a number of
other marine laboratories. They have an umbrella
contract involving about five of us.
bio-deterioration, studies on fouling
organisms, boring organisms, physiology of
shell deposition, things that are of interest to
the Navy, and that's the only real official
connection that we have. Now, I noticed, though,
that you also were attached to an old NR facility in
London. Okay, now that's legit. I had an 18-month
year leave of absence from Duke. to serve as a
so-called liaison scientist in oceanography and
marine biology, ONR London. And at that time, I was
officially a civilian employee of the Department
of the Navy. And what exactly does a liaison
officer in London, let's say, do in terms of advice
to ONR? Well, the primary objective was to visit as
many marine oceanographic facilities as
possible in Europe. Talk with people about trends
in research. And then on your return to London,
write up an article for what's known as European
Scientific Notes, published monthly by the
London office, distributed to over maybe 3,000
people in the United States. And the articles that
you write give an impression of the laboratories
that you visit, the programs that are there, the
facilities they have for research. ever interest
they may have on having American scientists work
there. Indications of an interest in cooperative
research. So it's to primarily keep the U.S.
scientific community informed on trends in
Europe. Has there traditionally always been one
American scientist attached to the ONR in London?
Oh, at the time I was there, there were About 35.
About 35. And 17 of them were civilians
representing not just oceanography. They go
everything from anthropology to zoology. And the
other 17 were blue suitors, so-called, line Navy
officers who had a more applied mission-oriented
interest, but it was the same sort of thing. They
would visit the admiralty office or admiralty
labs or French or Western German
the academic.
Has this been your primary connection with ONR,
then your tour of duty, so to speak, in London? Oh,
yeah. I've always had a reasonably close contact
since the old days of Sid Gallop. Sid was in charge
of oceanic biology, ONR, Washington for many
years, and I think got me started on my
international interest. Okay, that's the point
I'm trying to move us to. You're deeply involved
all through your career with international
organizations, and that seems to be the striking
point about your career in terms of sitting in the
Senate. How do you explain that? How did that
happen? Well, I remember the phone conversation.
In 1957, I received a formal invitation from
Professor Crisp, now a fellow of the Royal
Society, then director of a small lab at Bangor,
Wales, inviting me to present a paper at the 15th
International Congress of Zoology in a section
that was devoted to barnacles and celebrating the
Darwin Centennial. I was then just barely out of
graduate school, and of course it came as quite a
thrill, but the sad part of it was I didn't have a
cent. So, nothing ventured, nothing gained. I
called O&R Washington.
You can turn it off again. Sure. Didn't have any
money. Right. What is happening is that you have no
money and you said nothing ventured, nothing
gained. Right. Which I mean, I assume you called
O&R. So I called Sid Gower, who I knew casually, and
told him about the invitations. and asked if it
would be possible to get some financial support
through ONR to permit me to participate. And Sid
indicated that under one primary condition, and
that would be that I would not be permitted to go
directly to London in return. I would have to agree
to visit at least one British marine laboratory.
which, of course, was ridiculous because I would
have given my ITs to visit several. So I
reluctantly accepted the conditions, and he
provided me with what was then known as Military
Air Transportation Service travel. And that got
me started in the London meeting where I met all
sorts of people from all over the world, visited
the Scottish Marine Biological Laboratory
afterwards in Oban. Well, it's now in Oban. It used
to be in Millport. Then went down to the big marine
biological lab in Plymouth, met a lot of that
crowd. So when I came home, I had started to become
familiar with a number of European scientists.
And it just seems to have continued, the contacts
that I made then.
International Association of Biological
Oceanographic Research. YABO. YABO. What is
that? Well, there is a whole hierarchy of
international associations. I think it's ICSU,
International Council of Scientific Unions, and
under that umbrella you have international
associations of virtually every discipline, one
of which is YABO. And this is a relatively recent
effort to coordinate and improve communications
between people within any one discipline
directly rather than having them go through some
common
larger framework. Did this evolve out of your
international experience, international
cooperation? Well, the organization itself
evolved quite independently of me. I had nothing
to do with that, but presumably my position with it
now is a direct result of my earlier involvement
with international
Okay,
what is your present position? Right now, I'm the
chairman of the U.S. group of YABO, and if things at
the Edinburgh meetings progress the way I assume
they will, I will wind up being secretary for YABO
on a whole international base.
Obviously, you favor international
cooperation. Oh, very definitely. Do you think
that the new legislation and negotiations being
worked on in terms of treaties and the
underdeveloped countries claiming 200 and
possibly other model limits will interfere with
international cooperation? Certainly it will,
but the treaties are strictly political. They're
not scientific at all. And we'll just take, as we
always do, whatever's left. Okay, and what will be
the organization's opinion? YOLO? Yeah. Will
they try to negotiate? I doubt that they'll have
any say in the matter. In other words, you're
inclined to think then the agreements will be
politically arrived at without any scientific
input into it? with very little scientific input.
And if it's a question of a political decision
versus a scientific decision, it will always go
political. What effect do you think this will have
on oceanography? Will, for example, physical
oceanography be limited by these decisions?
Physical and geological. Because the only real
base for the whole treaty is to provide access to
raw materials on the part of the country that
thinks they own them uh do you think that that
international organizations will play a role
later on and then trying to renegotiate
activities of let's say physical and geological
oceanography Oh, I'm sure that there will be a long
progression, just as there has been already in the
Law of the Sea discussions that will go on ad
nauseum. Now, how did you become connected with
the NSF programs in India?
Through O&R London.
While I was there as a liaison scientist, the
captain wanted someone to go to Delhi for a
meeting. And somehow I fell into that slot. So I
went. And then two months later, the captain
wanted someone who was an expert on India to take
three Washington VIPs on a tour of marine
facilities in India. Since I was the only member of
the staff that had ever been anywhere in India, I
was the expert. And on that second tour, I met some
number of Indian scientists and got to know them
and communicated with them. The whole thing
evolved from that contact. And when NSF wanted
somebody to go over there for several things, they
asked me if I would go. Since I knew the people, I
went. Is marine biology making significant
strides in that part of the world?
I wouldn't say significant, no. Of course, it's
been several years and the whole political
climate there has changed since I was there. It
could, but there are some number of traditions
that are going to have to be broken down before
there's much really achieved. In your opinion,
will international cooperation, as you conceive
of it, bring direct aid to underdeveloped
countries?
such as India?
Only if the political climate of the country
encourages it. And the reason I qualify that,
there has been a so-called PL-480 program in India
for 20 years. And the Indian politicians are very
reluctant to give it free reign because of what
they feel would be a threat to the economy plus a
threat to their jurisdiction. Now, who sponsors
the PL-480 program? Oh, it's like a piece of pie
that is cut up by some number of different U.S.
agencies. EPA, NOAA, ONR, NSF, AID, the Congress.
Okay. And I somehow or another have you contacted
with, or you connected with the PL-480 program and
the Smithsonian Institution at the same time. Is
that possible? Oh yeah, because the Smithsonian
has a piece of the pie. Okay, and what was your
relationship with the Smithsonian and PL-480?
Okay, the Smithsonian ran its PL-480 programs in a
rather unique way, in that they set up an advisory
committee of scientists, one for biological
sciences, and I happened to serve on that
committee for about three years. And they insist
that on any excess currency program, there must be
a U.S. scientist as a counterpart to the scientist
from that country. So it's not just an effort to
provide financial support to the scientist of
some country, but it's to try to tie it to the U.S.
scientific community. but through my
involvement with their biological advisory
committee and visiting some number of their
facilities and programs, I got rather
knowledgeable. And exactly what would you do in
terms of your activities with PL-480?
Smithsonian. We would review proposals that had
been submitted by U.S. scientists, usually with
the scientists from one of the other PL-480
countries, and then either recommend that it be
funded or recommend that it not be funded or
recommend that it be modified and reconsidered.
Okay. And
in your opinion, what countries seem to work the
best in the PL-480 program?
Well, the Yugoslavs had a very efficient program
going. Israel undoubtedly would be the top of the
list. But it was not really a, they had an advantage
in that many of their scientists are trained in
this country. They speak English almost as well as
they do their own language. They have a lot of
traditions and customs which are common to this
country. So they started out from a much closer
working base than someone, say, in India
would. or would you venture to compare, for
example, scientific programs overseas and
scientific programs in the United States? Yeah,
it's possible.
If you start out with, say, West Germany, their
level of science is very similar to ours. England,
depending on the discipline, now if we're talking
about oceanography,
Some of their oceanographic programs are
certainly equal to the better ones in this
country. Then you begin to get into a pretty gray
area. France, there's a lot more exception there.
Italy, there's still more exception. The
Scandinavian countries in certain specific
subdivisions of the discipline, they're easily
equal to us. Others, they may not be. Soviet Union,
in certain specific areas, they are equal to us. In
others, they're about where we were in the early
30s. And once you've covered those countries, and
I can't speak to East Germany because I've never
been there, but then you begin to get into a whole
third tier of countries where they don't really
have a very well-organized or a very modern
oceanographic program.
is another story entirely. Japan, very possibly
in the realm of especially fisheries, would
easily be equal to us, but in pure oceanography,
no. It has seemed, and I certainly can stand to be
corrected on this, it has seemed that the ONR gave a
great deal of direction to our beginnings as a
country in oceanography, in formal oceanography
after World War II. Do you feel that ONR still gives
that kind of direction?
Well, I couldn't agree more with your first
statement. There's no doubt in my mind that we owe
the early development, the period of 45-50, the
early development of oceanography almost
exclusively to ONR. Then, with the birth of NSF,
some of the role of ONR was taken over. And I'm sure
others have commented that many of the staff who
had been in ONR went with NSF. And then, of course,
later you had the birth of some number of other
granting agencies, and AEC began to take over some
minor role, now more major, in coastal
oceanography. Eventually you had NOAA. But NOAA
has never assumed any of the role that ONR had in the
sense of support of oceanography through grants.
They've tried to do it in-house with varying
degrees of success.
So the role has been diversified, and many of the
things that ONR did in the 45-50 period are now done
by other people, but not necessarily any more
efficiently. Do you think the diversification
was a good thing?
Well, if you consider the emphasis which was put on
ONR's support several years ago toward
mission-oriented research, if that had happened
without NSF being in existence, I think it would
have been a real blow to basic oceanography. But
the fact that NSF was available to pick up some of
the pieces lessened the impact Diversification
usually is pretty good if there's any real effort
to coordinate and see to it that there's not too
much duplication.
I want to return back to NSF in a second with the IDOE
program. But before I move you away from ONR, I want
to ask you a series of specific questions that are
almost random. What is your connection with CG
Bookout? He was my major professor. He and I have
published together on 70 or 80 publications. He
was the director of this laboratory before I
became director. And he's a good friend. Is it his
influence that turns you toward the study of
crustacean lava?
Certainly up to a point. We started working
together when I was a graduate student. barnacle
shell development. And I became intrigued by the
fact that you can't really study development of a
shell unless you know the larval stages that
contribute to the adult that grows the shell. And
that led to a study of a number of aspects of
crustacean development. So you could say yes. But
there were a number of other people who influenced
that. Good. I was going to say, who else would you
consider big, as we see in history, during the
1950s, shaping your career? One name stands out
perhaps above all, and that's Gunnar Thorsen, who
was the man who developed the laboratory at
Elsinore following the Second World War. He was
professor at Copenhagen. I came to know him quite
well. He visited here some number of times, and his
47th publication on the larval development of
Danish marine bottom invertebrates became a
Bible for me when I was a graduate student. And
again, one of those crazy coincidences. My first
semester at Duke, I was required, as were all
graduate students, to give a report to my peers on
some research publication. I thrashed around
trying to find an appropriate one that I liked, and
I couldn't. So Bookie shoved Gunnar's tome at me
and said, here, why don't you do this one? So I did.
And the more I read it, the more intrigued I got. I'm
sure that Thorson was one of the primary
motivating things. Anyone else? Well, there's
quite a collection of people. I would like to think
that Dennis Crisp influenced my thinking along
that line. Although at that time he was not that
actively involved in studies on larvae, he was in
barnacles. And Harold Barnes, who I guess is the
second best-known British scientist in the realm
of Barnacle Research and with whom I attempted to
work that year that I spent at Millport. He
influenced my thinking for better or for worse.
Okay, I have another problem with you too at Duke. I
have you listed as a marine zoologist and later as a
research associate.
Well, I think this is some of the academia
gibberish really. Okay. Apparently, you have to
have a label of some sort. And a research associate
in the term that is used there meant that I was not an
appointed faculty member. I was working on soft
money research grants for a long time. And during
that period, I would have been labeled as a
research associate. But you were still
nevertheless working with crustaceans. Oh, yes.
Okay. I was afraid for a while you were and a while
you weren't. No, no. never really deviated from
the crustacean realm. Okay, and crustacea,
that's always been your interest as a marine
biologist and oceanographer. Has your interest
always centered primarily around coastal
activity? Largely, although certain things have
led me farther out into the ocean than others like
this, the whole concept of distribution of
larvae. Have you made any international voyages
with other countries?
Not really, no.
Now,
when I have you becoming active in NSF, I am with
you. What were the goals of the International
Decade of Exploration, the IDOE? Oh, boy.
Well, You mean the political goals or the
scientific goals? Scientific goals.
Well, presumably it was to improve our
understanding of the oceans and contribute to a
more efficient use of the natural resources
therein in the interest of the welfare of mankind.
Was it oriented towards ecology in terms of
scientific goals?
Well, now, when you say ecology, do you mean it in
the scientific sense or in the public sense of
environment? I mean the public sense of
environment. I don't think so. There are four
subdivisions of IDOE, and almost all of them are
oriented toward scientific objectives rather
than environmental objectives. Well, then what
is the systematics and ecology program? That's
within NSF, but not within IDOE. Right. Okay. This
is a subdivision of NSF which receives and reviews
and supports research programs by American
scientists dealing with systematics and ecology
of terrestrial, freshwater, or estuarine marine
animals and plants. But it has nothing to do with
IDOE. But it never had any connection with IDOE?
No. Okay. The IDOE is administered by a totally
separate, discrete division of the National
Science
Foundation.
Well, what exactly was your role in the
Systematics of Ecology program? I've never had
any. Never had any. I have you contacted with them
for some reason. Heaven only knows why.